---
layout: post
title: Hooks, hooks and hooks!
---

I have briefly mentioned hooks in both of my previous posts. [React - basic syntax](2019-03-16-Basic-syntax-react.md) and [What is React?](2019-03-07-what-is-react.md).

Hooks are a recent React feature that help you do things like have state and lifecycle functionality in function components. One thing I like about hooks for example, is that in class components there are so many different lifecycle methods. But with hooks, all I need to know is the one `useEffect`!

Although there are many hooks, and you can even create your own custom hooks, in this post I am going to focus on `useState` and `useEffect` which I have used the most so far.

## useState

`useState` helps you... use state... ¯\\_(ツ)_/¯ in function components.
Before hooks were released, it was normal for people to write their "stateless" components as function components and their "stateful" components as class components. The problem here is that what happens when a component goes from "stateless" to "stateful"? Well, then you get the fun task of converting a function component to a class component.
Sure you could write everything as a class component, but it always seemed pointless and wasteful because you know that the component will never need lifecyle methods or state.

Now that hooks have come out, we don't need to worrry about this!
This also doesn't mean that they are going to get rid of class components, this just means you have more choice on how you write your components.

Lets see how we can turn a class component with state into a function component.

```jsx
import React from "react";

class App extends React.Component {
  constructor(props) {
    super(props);
    this.state = {
      name: "stranger"
    };
  }

  render() {
    return (
      <div>
        <input onChange={e => this.setState({ name: e.target.value })} />
        <p>hello, {this.state.name}</p>
      </div>
    );
  }
}
export default App;
```

In this example is how we would normally have state in a component. It has all of the stuff we are used to seeing - initialise the state in the constructor, update the state with `this.setState`.

Lets see the same example, but in a function component

```javascript
import React, { useState } from "react";

function App() {
  const [name, setName] = useState("stranger");

  return (
    <div>
      <input
        onChange={e => {
          setName(e.target.value);
        }}
      />
      <p>hello, {name}</p>
    </div>
  );
}
export default App;
```

Looking at this, it looks kinda familiar, kinda different coming from class components. Lets break it down.

Lets start with the initial state, `useState("stranger")` is doing this for us, whereas before we had to do `this.state = {name: "stranger"}` in the constructor.

To get and update the state is a little stranger (if you aren't familiar with array destructuring). `const [name, setName] = useState("")` here we are using the desctructuring syntax to get the current state (name) and the setState function (setName). Before to do this, we could get the name with `this.state.name` and update it with `this.setState({ name: e.target.value })`

What I like about hooks, is as you can see in my p tag, I just print the name variable, it looks so much simpler than `this.state.name`!

## useEffect

In class components, we use life cycle methods such as `componentDidMount()` and `componentWillUnmount()`. useEffect is the combining all these life cycle methods into the one powerful function.
When you see the example below, you can see that in order to setup the interval, we need the lifecycle method `componentDidMount` but to clear the interval we need `componentWillUnmount`.

If you have a lot of things going on in your component, it can get quite hard to see the setup and teardown code for specific features.


```javascript
import React from "react";

class App extends React.Component {
  constructor(props) {
    super(props);
    this.state = {
      count: 0
    };
  }

  componentDidMount() {
    this.interval = setInterval(() => {
      this.setState({count: this.state.count + 1})
    }, 1000)
  }

  componentWillUnmount() {
    clearInterval(this.interval)
  }

  render() {
    return (
      <div>
        <p>
          Count: {this.state.count}
        </p>
      </div>
    );
  }
}

export default App;
```

This is the useEffect example

```javascript
import React, {useState, useEffect} from 'react';

function App() {
  const [count, setCount] = useState(0) 
  //this part is super important. useEffect takes a function and it shouldn't be called inside of something else e.g. another function, if statements, etc

  useEffect(functiom() {
    const interval = setInterval(() => {
      setCount(count + 1)
    })
    return () => {
      clearInterval(interval)
    }
  }, [])
  
  render() {
    return (
      <div>
        <input onChange={(e) => {
          setName(e.target.value)
        }}/>
        <p>
          hello, {name}
        </p>
      </div>
    );
  }
}
export default App
```
Here we are using `useEffect` to create the interval, by passing in `[]` as the second argument, this tells the React you only want this effect to run once when the component renders for the first time. If we didn't provide this, the effect would be run every time the component renders, which (from experience) will create an infinite loop!

In the `useEffect` you can see I am returning a function, this is the "clean up" function for our hook. Since we told React with the empty array to only run the effect once, this clean up function will only run once when our component is unmounted.

That's it for today from me! I hope it wasn't too much!





